Hello everyone. Welcome to a new episode of The
Dissenter. I'm your host, as always, Ricardo Lops, and
today I'm here with a return guest, Doctor Jeff
McMahon, and in our previous conversations we've tackled topics
like the ethics of killing, the ethics of killing
in war. We also talked about veganism and academic
freedom, and today I thought it would be relevant
due to. Recent events and developments in the US
but also elsewhere that we tackle the ethics of
political violence which will also include political assassinations. So
Jeff, welcome back to the show. It's always a
pleasure to talk with you.
Thanks, Ricardo. Always a pleasure for me too.
OK, so maybe before we get into the ethics
itself, let's start by perhaps trying to arrive at
the definition of political violence here. So as a
philosopher, and of course I could ask the same
question to political scientists and other people, but as
a philosopher, what is your understanding of political violence?
How do you approach it?
Well, it's a term that is being used a
lot now, and what one has to do is
try to understand how people are applying it. Um,
AS I say, it's a sort of new term
you won't find it in a dictionary, and normally
what people mean when they refer to political violence
is violence by individuals or small groups of people.
FOR political reasons or the violence that is motivated
by essentially a political aim, and one of the
paradigms of political violence is one that you mentioned
assassination, which is normally defined as Uh, the killing
of a particularly prominent or important person for a
political reason. So a political assassination would come within
the scope of political violence. Um, POLITICAL violence is
also substate violence, um, and it is a term
that I think in ordinary use excludes war, so
people wouldn't consider war political violence, even though war
is almost always. Uh, THE use of violence by
military means, uh, for the achievement of aims that
are essentially political, but because it's done by the
state and externally rather than internally, um, war wouldn't
count as political violence, though violence by Government agents
internally or domestically could be considered political violence. So
what the members of ICEE are doing in the
United States to people would be considered by many
to be political violence. Um, AGAIN, it's a, it's
a, it's a vague notion, partly because The, the,
the notion of the political is vague, and even
the notion of violence can can be vague, um,
and action that begins as political violence can end
up as something that wouldn't be considered political violence.
So for example, Uh, some forms of political violence,
uh, could. Um, Lead to something that we might
think of as revolution, and a revolution would be
initially at least considered political violence or revolutionary violence
would be considered political violence, but It could develop
into civil war, and once there's a civil war
in progress, wouldn't, one wouldn't refer to the action
of either side as political violence because it would
then be war. Um, I think the notion of
political violence also encompasses virtually all instances of what
we think of as terrorism, which is typically defined
as the intentional harming of innocent people as a
means of achieving aims that are political in nature.
Um, AND terrorism is not always, of course, a,
a, a domestic matter. There's international terrorism. Um, SO
we might think of the destruction of the Twin
Towers in 9/11 in the United States as political
violence, uh, consider the massacres of October 7th in
Israel as political violence and, and, and so on.
Uh, SO you mentioned Israel. Uh, HOW about, uh,
genocide? Would you also consider that a form of
political violence? I mean, notwithstanding the fact that, uh,
illegally genocide is considered, according to international law, a
crime, uh, but I, I mean, would you also
consider it political violence?
Well, again, I think the the notion of political
violence is too vague for there to be a
precise answer to that question. Um, IT'S just a
matter of how the term is used. Um, CERTAINLY
genocide can start off as political violence, I think
perhaps. Uh, Rwanda in the early 1990s, um, May
have started off as, you know, one ethnic group
attacking members of another, uh, for reasons of revenge
and other, you know, politically motivated reasons, but once
it became kind of systematic and large scale, then
it becomes, then I think we would want to.
Distinguish genocide from mere political violence. Political violence, I
think, is As the term is typically used, excludes
large scale and in particular, uh state sponsored violence.
Uh, BY the way, um, please tell me what
you think about this, but, uh, political violence doesn't
necessarily have to involve humans or human life as
targets, right? I mean, for example, if it's, uh,
organized groups of people, uh, causing property damage to
express themselves politically, that would also be considered a
form of political violence or not.
Yeah, yeah, I think so. Um, I was thinking
that usually violence is understood as Physical harm to
a person's body, but of course you're right, um,
destruction of property is also violence, yes. Uh, AND
if, if the motivation is political, then, then it's
political violence. On the other hand, um, When Russia
destroys residential buildings in Ukraine or Israeli forces destroy
residential buildings in Gaza, we wouldn't call that political
violence because it's part of war. It's, it's, it's
terrorism in war, but um war very often involves
terrorism.
Yes, and a point that you touched on there
that I think is very important, the motivations that
the actors have for the violence that they perpetrate
are relevant in this case, right, because they have
to be political in order for their actions to
be considered political violence,
right, yeah, it has to be politically motivated to
count as political violence. Yeah, sure. Mhm,
YES, because I, I think that's, uh, an important
point to clarify because it will be relevant for,
uh, later when we talk about political assassinations and
I want to explore a particular recent case and
I think that will be relevant there.
So, but let me, let me, let me, um,
interrupt you and say that, uh. Um, THIS political
violence is not a topic on which I have
written or Uh, done any particular systematic study of
and In particular, um. I am not deeply informed
about recent instances of political violence. I'm, I'm aware
of them, but, um, I, I, I don't know
the details, um, in any depth, so I just.
Issue that disclaimer at the at the outset.
No, of course, and thank you for that. And
as I said before we started the interview, uh,
I wanted to have you on the show because
I also wanted to have on the show an
ethical perspective on political violence, and I thought that
it would link in a relevant way to your
other work on the ethics of. Killing for example,
so that's the reason why we're having this conversation,
but let's get, let's get then into more of
the ethics of political violence. So do you think
that there are instances where political violence is justified?
Uh, YES, um, there are instances, but what I'm
going to be arguing as we continue is that
they are quite rare. Um. But let's take the
case of assassination. Uh, THERE was a plot involving
some, uh, even I believe some German military personnel
to assassinate Hitler. Um, IF they had been able
to carry out that plot and if they had
succeeded, I think that would have been justified political
assassination and therefore justified political violence. Um, SIMILARLY, if
someone had been able to assassinate Stalin. That may
well also have been uh something that would be
morally justified. I think it's an important condition of
justifiable political violence. THAT the targets of the political
violence be morally liable to be attacked. Uh, AND
by that I mean they must have, they must
be guilty of or responsible for some threat of
harm or some wrong to people of a sufficient
level of gravity to justify violence. Now, um, I'm
gonna say something slightly technical here, and that is
that. By liable, I, I mean something like this.
They, they have forfeited their right not to be
harmed. They would not be wronged by being harmed.
But I also think that certain conditions on the
justifiability of violence are internal to the concept of
liability. Now there's disagreement about that, um, among philosophers.
Uh, MANY, many others disagree with me about this.
I'm not sure how much difference this makes, but,
uh, what I mean is that. A person is
not liable to be harmed if harming that person
would do no good whatsoever, or if it, you
know, if it would be ineffective. Um, I also
think that we measure proportionality by reference to weighing
the good that could be achieved by causing harm
against the magnitude of the harm and so on.
And so I think of necessity and proportionality as
constraints that are internal to liability. So someone is
not liable to a harm that would be disproportionate.
Nor is somebody morally liable to a harm that
would be ineffective or counterproductive. And what I want
to say here is that in principle people can
be morally liable to be harmed, even killed for
political reasons. Like I say, good examples would be
Hitler and Stalin, provided that Assassinating them would have
Prevented Great harms within Europe, within the Soviet Union,
rather than exacerbated those problems that were being caused
by these leaders, these political leaders. And what I
tend to think is that in most instances nowadays,
uh, political violence and political assassination in particular are
likely to be, um, not just ineffective, but counterproductive.
Um, THEY'RE going to, uh, lead to, and, and,
and this is particularly true in democratic societies, um,
in which If a person has been elected to
an office, it's a, you know, it's a violation
of the principles of democracy and so on to
kill somebody who has been elected by the people,
and the reaction of the people is likely to
be one of great outrage and indignation, and, uh,
the, the person killed is going to become a
martyr in the, in the, in the eyes of
the person's supporters, in which case, those who succeed
the assassinated leader. Um, ARE likely to do things
that are even worse, or at least as bad
as those that the leader was going to do
anyway. So I tend to think that political violence
at all levels is Not just ineffective, but counterproductive.
And for those reasons, you don't have a liability
justification or any other kind of justification for doing
it.
Right, and, and I mean, actually, uh, there's uh
work in sociology that supports what you're saying there
because there's a sociologist, an American sociologist, Erica Chenoweth.
And she studied violent and nonviolent revolutions, and the
ones that are nonviolent tend to last longer in
time and tend to have more support also of
the general population, so they tend to lead to
regimes that are more stable afterwards.
Yeah, well, I mean. One thing that's perfectly obvious
is that In conditions in which political violence is
more likely, the population in which it Might occur
is going to be divided. They're going to be,
as the people say nowadays, polarized, and violence by
one side is never going to be. Convincing, persuasive,
or whatever to people on the other side, it
is going to, uh, produce a desire for vengeance,
revenge, retribution, it's going to elicit hatred, um, and,
Uh, so the use of political violence. Will very
often just provoke an escalation of violence and do
nothing to, uh, achieve peaceful reconciliation, compromise, enabling people
to live together peacefully. Uh, IT, it, it's just
always going to be counterproductive in this way, self-defeating.
So I wrote here a few examples that came
to my mind when I was thinking about uh
cases of uh political violence that I think would
be justified and uh I want to hear your
thoughts about it. So I wrote here uh slave
revolts. Revolutions against oppressive regimes resisting occupation by another
country, and I also included, and I can explain
why I included that in the 19th century, particularly
workers fighting for their rights like when for example
they destroyed. Machinery in their factories and things like
that. So, uh, I mean, uh, and I, I'm,
I'm just going to say about that, that, uh,
I think that for example in the case of
revolutions against oppressive regimes and workers fighting for their
rights, uh, in a violent form. I think it's
justified when there are no legal mechanisms that they
can resort to or when the state doesn't listen
to their demands because of its nature or it
might be, as I said, an oppressive regime or
something like that. So what do you think about
these examples that I came up with?
Uh, I think they're all different. They all raise
different questions. Let me see if I can think
of some. Uh, CONSIDERATIONS that might be common to
all of them. You mentioned workers destroying machinery. That
is different from harming people. Um, YOU mentioned slave
revolts. Um, IF slave revolts are directed against slave
owners, that's one thing because the slave owners, uh,
are arguably liable to be harmed. Um. Violent revolutions,
um. Um, I, they may be directed towards military
forces, whatever, similarly with Uh, resistance to occupation. But
I think a lot depends on what the conditions
are now, so slavery. Um, WAS involve people who
were dispersed over a huge area. Collective action was
difficult. It would have been very difficult for slaves
to engage in Gandhian tactics of nonviolent resistance because
they were all spread out over different plantations and
so on throughout the south. So their slave revolts
directed against slave owners might have been justified on
the assumption that they could somehow or other appeal
to the consciences of people elsewhere. On the other
hand, it's not clear that the actual slave revolts
that involve killing people and so on had that
effect. I just don't know. I'm not a historian
of slavery, so I don't know. Um, I do
think, let me give you, uh, one example that
I, that is particularly, uh, pressing right now, and
that is the occupation of Gaza and the West
Bank by Israel for many, many decades. Um, The
occupation of those areas by Israel, I think, is
a kind of paradigm of political injustice. This was
a uh a people. With a sense of their
own identity, with their own culture, with their own
norms and so on, who were systematically oppressed, dominated,
and denied freedom and rights of self-determination. I still
think every instance of violence that wasn't immediate self-defense
by the Palestinians was self-defeating. I think, and I've
said this for many decades, that If the Palestinians
initially had been led by a Gandhi-like figure rather
than Arafat and the PLO who engaged in terrorism,
I think the Palestinians would have had their own
state again decades ago. Because I think that's what
Israel was much more vulnerable to the appeal to
conscience, especially earlier when Israeli society consisted of refugees
fleeing political persecution and oppression and domination and had
come to seek safety and to have the ability
to be self-determining. And if the Palestinians had made
the appeal to them by saying, What about us?
Are, don't we also have rights to freedom and
self-determination and and so on. Um I think the
Israelis would have been much more receptive to that
than they would have been to the use of
political violence and in particular terrorism, which again, as
I said earlier, simply inspires hatred and a desire
for revenge. So I think, for example, this unspeakably
immoral war that Israel has fought in Gaza, um,
will ultimately be self-defeating for Israel. And, uh, independently
of the, you know, the, the horrible beyond description
consequences for Palestinian civilians. Um,
SO, uh, since you're mentioning that, since you're mentioning
that, and since earlier you also referred to October
7th, let me ask you then, do you think
that if on October 7th, 2023, Hamas had only
targeted, uh, military, it would have been a form
of justified political violence?
No, because I think it would have been, again,
uh, ineffective and self-defeating. What they did was vastly
worse, um, vastly more immoral and vastly more self-defeating,
um, uh, than, than. It would have been if
they had attacked only military installations. That would have
been in a in a way discriminating, but Uh
It, it would not have done any good. What,
what, what the Palestinians. Need to do is to
make their appeal nonviolently. Uh, THAT'S, that's my view.
Like, you know, one thing that they could do
would be to have mass sit-ins blocking roads to
settlements, um, or blocking the IDF in, in, in,
in Gaza, for example, but nonviolently.
Yes, the reason why
that Gandhi did,
yes, the reason why I ask you that, I
mean, actually it's two reasons. The first one is
that according to international law, people who are part
of a population that is occupied by another country
have the right to resist, and that includes. Political
violence if it targets only military and also I've
heard from some people, some of them friends, others
not who are pro-Palestinian, and they, they tell me
that they don't consider Hamas. WHAT they do as
a form of terrorism, of course legally that's not
correct, but anyway, they don't consider them a terrorist
group because they're, I mean the kinds of things
they do is that is that exactly that kind
of thing that they consider to be. Um, RESISTANCE
that uh that they consider to be, uh, justifiable,
uh, or, yeah, justifiable resistance, so.
Well, look, I, I think there can be very
extreme circumstances in which what we call terrorism could
be morally justified. That is, um, there could be
very extreme circumstances and incredibly rare in which the
harm, the intentional harming of innocent people as a
means of achieving a political aim could be, uh,
justified. But I think that's very rare and what
Hamas does is terrorism, pure and simple. When it
fires rockets into Israel, it's trying to kill innocent
people. It's trying to kill people in their homes.
And that's what Hamas did on October 7th. I
think myself, uh, Everything that Hamas does is Unjustifiable
morally. It's not only totally immoral in the effects
that it has on the targets who are almost
always innocent people, innocent in the sense that they
are not liable to be harmed or killed. They
haven't done anything to justify this. But also because
what they do is totally ineffective. Are the Palestinians
in Gaza better off now for what Hamas did
on October 7th? AND um. Hamas could predict that,
they could know that. They, every conflict between Hamas
and Israel since Hamas came to power. Has taken
the following form. Hamas shoots some rockets into Israel
or some Hamas militants get into Israel through the
tunnels and innocent people are harmed or killed, and
then Israel sends tanks and planes into Gaza and
kills far more innocent Palestinians than Uh, Hamas was
able to kill. And what's so they can they
can predict that what they do is going to
cause far more suffering among their own people than
among Israelis. But also, it never does any good
at all, except, you know, the only thing it
does is makes Israelis think Palestinians can never be
trusted. They're all terrorists. I can't tell you how
many times I've heard that kind of view expressed
in Israel. Um And That's, it's because of what
Hamas and before that, the PLO did. And, uh,
and again, another reason why violence by Palestinians has
been self-defeating is that Israel has dependence, particularly earlier,
but even now, has depended very heavily on the
United States for economic and military support, military support
in the form of bombs and that sort of
thing. And um It's been easier for Israel to
get this from the United States. Because people in
the United States think of Palestinians as terrorists rather
than as victims of injustice, and that's because what
you, what people in the US read about are,
you know, the instances of violence by the Palestinian
groups against Israeli civilians. So again, I think it's
just totally counterproductive in every way, in addition to
being immoral because the targets are not liable.
Mhm. OK, so,
you know, you spoke of people being pro-Palestinian. I
mean, the, what I wish is that people would
stop thinking of themselves as essentially Palestinian or essentially
Israeli Jew, everybody waving their flags and being opposed
to members of the other group. What they need
is for all of them to recognize that they
are human beings. That for the most part, they
want the same things in life. They want to
live in peace. They want their children to grow
up healthy and get an education and prosper. Things
that people everywhere want. Um, YOU know, maybe some
Hamas militants are, uh, Different in that respect. Um,
NO doubt the members of the current Israeli government
are, are, are different in that respect, but most
people Can't can learn to live with each other
in peace without, uh, this, this dreadful kind of
in-group outgroup, uh, uh, hatred on, on both sides.
So I'm supportive of those groups that try to
bring communities and peoples together. I'll just put in
a plug for Parents Circle, which is a group
of bereaved, uh, Israelis and bereaved Palestinians who've come
together to try to Show what I have just
said. We're all people and let's not kill each
other's children.
OK, so maybe you also would like to comment
on the final example I gave about workers in
the 19th century destroying machinery because, I mean, they
were being exploited in that particular case by people
who owned factories and stuff like that. So what
do you think about that as a form of
political violence?
Uh, PROBABLY justifiable. Uh, AGAIN, it's just destruction of
property. And when one reads about the conditions in
which people labored in the 19th century, I know
mostly about England where, where I live. Um, THE
conditions were horrific. People, uh, uh, and, and involving
small children as well, um, and people being, uh,
maimed and killed in this machinery and, uh. Yeah,
the conditions were. Appalling What the industrialists were doing
was highly immoral. Just like what a lot of
billionaires today are doing is highly immoral, um. And
the destruction of machinery. I would be a way
of Communicating to these people the anger, the getting
them to pay attention. You have to make them
pay attention. Would these industrialists have responded to, uh,
forms of later forms of industrial action like strikes
and sit-in strikes and that sort of thing? Who
knows, they may have just been able to call
in the military and, and, uh, get everybody dispersed
and, uh, people elsewhere wouldn't even know about it.
So, the possibilities for the effectiveness of nonviolent action
have Developed greatly since the 19th century with mass
communication and so on. And when newspapers can report
these things and photographers can be there to take
pictures or videos of, uh, uh, people beating up
nonviolent protesters and so on that. ENABLES nonviolent action
to be much more effective because it makes the
moral appeal public. Uh, AND that was probably not
possible to workers in, in industrial societies in the
19th century. So they had, they had to do
something else. And I do think, you know, destruction
of machinery is far More likely to be justified
than harming persons.
Mhm. Yes, and also because we have to keep
in mind, and I think that I mentioned this
or at least alluded to it when presenting the
example when I said that they didn't back in
early industrialization, they didn't really have much legal resources
and so strikes. Were not even uh something that
was protected legally and so I mean they didn't
have many nonviolent resources to express their frustration against
the exploit the exploitation they were victims of, right.
Yeah, I mean there were forms of public protests
that were possible, uh, you know, large gatherings of
people and so on, and of the sort that
still go on that went on the other day
in the US with the no kings protests. Um,
But It's difficult for workers in a particular town
to organize this kind of thing. Uh, OR to
get it publicized. I mean, there were in the
19th century rallies by suffragettes and people in favor
of expansion of the franchise to non-property owners and
to women and so on. And, and uh these
forms of appeal were generally nonviolent and eventually they
became Successful, mhm,
yes, so let me ask you now about the
political assassination specifically which I think and as I
mentioned earlier I think is uh the aspect or
one of the forms of political violence that perhaps
links more relevantly to the rest of your work
because it. Involves uh taking the life of someone
or several people so uh since you wrote, as
I said, the book on the ethics of killing
and the ethics of killing you in war, do
you have anything to say specifically about political assassinations?
Do you think that sometimes they might be justified?
I've, as I said earlier, I think the justification
would need to include. The the the the. Justified
claim that the victim of assassination. Um, WOULD not
be wronged by, uh, being killed. That would be
because this person continues to pose a threat of
unjustified harm to other people, and of course political
leaders can pose threats of unjustifiable harm to vast
numbers of innocent people as we see today and
Putin in Ukraine and Netanyahu and his Qatari in
Gaza. And the Trump administration in the United States
causing vast harm to persons and institutions there. Um,
22 points I think are important here. In most
cases, as I said earlier, I think political assassination
is unlikely to be effective in achieving the aim
of eliminating the wrongdoing. Um, AND that's because, you
know, the leader will, will be replaced by somebody
equally bad and political change will not occur. What
will, what will occur will be revenge against the
people who were in any way associated with the
assassin or assassins. Um, I'm forgetting now what the
other consideration was, but um So the, the, the
likely ineffectiveness is, is a An important consideration. Uh
GOSH, I, I'm just forgetting what the other thought
was. I mean, if the person is morally liable
to be harmed or killed, um, Then the assassination
would not be murder. Murder is the killing of
an innocent person. Um And uh. Very often political
assassination is against somebody who is guilty of great
wrongdoing, though the In instances of political assassination that
occurred to me just offhand, the successful ones, particularly
in the United States, so John F. Kennedy, Martin
Luther King, Robert Kennedy, uh, these were not wrongdoers.
These were not people who were morally liable to
be killed. Um. Nothing good was achieved by any
of this. Uh, AND, oh yeah, the other, that's
the other thing I wanted to say, and that
that is that It's important legally and also morally
to uphold a principled objection to assassination because It's
so often likely to be used against the wrong
people, um. So if if we have, if somebody
says, oh yeah, political assassination, assassination can be morally
justified. And lots of people come to believe that,
then the consequences are likely to be dreadful. So
we want to uphold a norm against Uh, assassination,
um. For, for that reason, if for no other.
And again, I think that coincides with my claim
that normally there are far better ways of Removing
from power some evil or tyrannical figure than assassination.
So let me ask you, OK. Yeah, let, let
me ask you, because earlier you mentioned Stalin, if
someone had killed Stalin. So let me ask you,
for example, when we're talking about uh people who
are the leaders of oppressive regimes like Stalin was,
like Hitler was, like Mussolini was, I've heard from
some philosophers that. Uh, PEOPLE, uh, in this case
we're talking about political figures, but it could be
any other person, people who act immorally like they
did toward other people. Uh, ONE of the reasons
why it might be. Justifiable to kill them is
that their life is worth less than the life
of other people, that because they are immoral, their
life is worth less. What do you think about
that kind of argument?
I, I, I think it's uh, uh, I, I'm,
I'm trying to be polite here, but I don't
think I can be. I think it's a silly
argument. Um, SUPPOSE someone's life is worth less. That's
not a reason to kill that individual. Um You
might say these people deserve it. You, you, you
might say, uh, uh, as a, a philosopher I
know in Cambridge has said that sometimes It, it
just, it, it's better if, if Such evil individuals
don't coexist with us on the planet, that we
have a better state of the world if it's
not blighted by the existence of these awful people.
These might be positive reasons for getting rid of
somebody. I don't myself think they are. Um, I,
I think, as I said, the justification that would
be Uh, really, the only realistic and feasible justification
for assassination would be a liability justification, namely that
a person in a prominent person in a position
of power. IS engaged in wrongdoing, threatens unjustifiable harm
to other people, and eliminating this person through assassination
would be the most effective means of defending the
potential victims of this prominent person. Um, IN that
case, political assassination or assassination could be morally justified,
but I think the justification would have to be
a liability justification. And I think That the, I
mean, you see this, uh, In the media now,
people saying we have to, you know, it's really
important to achieve justice in the Middle East by
making sure that Netanyahu is punished and so on.
Yes, I think in a way it's important that
Netanyahu should be punished, but only as a means
of preventing him from engaging in further wrongdoing and
only as a means of preventing his action from
Providing inspiration to others. If we punish people like
Netanyahu, um, we may deter others like him in
the future. We shouldn't punish him because he deserves
it, though he's, in my view, about as evil
as any human being could ever possibly be.
Mhm, YEAH, I, I understand that distinction and I
think it's important to make it so, uh, but
uh I mean just putting aside using that type,
that kind of argument to justify political violence or
not, just putting that bit aside, do you agree
as a moral philosopher that people who practice immoral
acts, people who are immoral, their lives are worth
less than the lives of people who are immoral?
I don't know. I, I, the problem is I
don't know what that means. How much is my
life worth? What is it? Is this some sort
of monetary value or what? I mean, Um, Uh
Do we want there to be evil people on
the planet? No, um. Uh, IT would be better
if people were good and nice and so on,
but worth less. I. Well, in Let, let me,
let me put it this way. Um, IF, uh,
if I see a, uh, uh, Some 90 year
old person about to drown. This person's only got
another year or so of life left to live,
the perfectly harmless person. And also in the water,
there's Donald Trump, who's about to drown, uh, and
I can save only one of them. Um, I'm
going to save the very elderly non-Donald Trump person.
So in that sense, yeah, I mean, I, I
wouldn't, I, I, I, I've, would I even spend,
uh, uh, uh, 10% to save Donald Trump's life?
No. So in that sense, it's worth less, but
that's because, you know, for the reasons I've given,
I just, The world would be a much better
place without Donald Trump in it.
Mhm. Yeah, I mean, the reason why I asked
you that is that because uh one time I
was having, uh, not for the channel, but in
other, in another context, I was having a discussion
with a philosopher as well, because I was saying
that uh the lives of um the lives of
all people are worth the same. I mean, the
life of, for example, a billionaire is worth the
same as the, the life of a common worker.
I mean, something. Like that and then it was
when the person said, oh no, that's not true,
because the life of immoral people is worth less
than the life of moral people and then they
mentioned Hitler, for example, and said, oh, the life
of Hitler was worth less than the life of
the average German, and I mean I find it
really hard to understand that argument honestly.
Well, like I say, it's just, I, there are
different ways of interpreting such a claim, worth less.
What does that mean? And some of, some of
the ways of interpreting that claim, uh, are, are
probably plausible. So again, if I could save the
life of Hitler or save the life of some
ordinary German, I would save the life of the
ordinary German. And part of the reason for that
would be What each of these people was likely
to do. Another reason would be how good is
that individual's life for that person. Um, SO for
example, Again, uh, Just take, take the life of
somebody whose life is full of suffering and misery,
and they often contemplate suicide and they go on
living just for the sake of others, uh, and
so on, and there's nothing that can be done
to make that person's life better. It's just an
Intrinsically miserable life. There's nothing evil about this person,
but the person's life is miserable. And then there's
another person whose life is very well worth living.
This person is flourishing and happy and so on
and so forth. Again, if I could save one
or the other of them. I think I have
a reason to save the person whose life would
be better rather than to save the life of
the person whose life would be much, much less
good and barely good at all, or maybe not
good at all. Um, AND what I think about
Hitler, for example, is that his was not a
life that was worth living for a human being.
He had a life that was terrible for him.
Even if he thought he was happy and so
on, this was still. In my view, a bad
life for a human being completely independently of the
effects his action had on other people. And and
the way I always try to bring that out
is I ask people, I, I give people the
following sort of thought experiment. Suppose you're a parent
of a child and you get a phone call
from the school and it says, um, we've had
a, we've had an incident here today. A child
was badly beaten up by a bully, and then
the person who's Saying this is, oh, excuse me
a moment, I've got, and then goes off the
phone for a minute and the parent on the
phone doesn't know whether her child is the bully
or the victim. And I think most of us
would want our child to be the victim rather
than the bully. And, you know, the victim has
been harmed, but we want our children. Um, WE
would rather our children have less happiness. And not
be immoral than be in one way happier but
be immoral for their own sake, for their own
good. And so that's another way in which Hitler's
life was worth less. It was a terrible life
for a human being. So we can go on
and on and on. We can say that Hitler
was liable to be killed. Some people would say,
many people would say he deserved to die. And
so on and so forth. There are lots of
ways of interpreting this claim that his life was
worth less, but it's important, I think, to try
to clarify which of these different interpretations we have
in mind.
Mhm. Right, so let's talk more about the motives
of people who assassinate other people. I mean, as
you, as you said earlier, for it to count
as a form of political violence or a political
assassination, the motives of the killer have to be
political, and I find this very interesting because, I
mean, one thing that happened recently and it was
in fact one. Of the cases that motivated me
to invite you on the show to talk about
the ethics of political violence and political assassinations, more
specifically was the case of the assassination of Charlie
Kirk in the US. Why? Because I mean at
this point in time it's still not clear whether
it was a political assassination or not. Why? Because
we're not sure about the political motivations of the.
I mean, it seems that he didn't have any
form of coherent political belief system or something like
that, and then there are contradictory sort of evidence
like for example the fact that he inscribed in
these uh bullet casings, uh, things like Bella Choo
Bella Chow, which is an anti-fascist song, but on
the other hand, uh. The police, the authorities spoke
with his roommate and with the friends that he
spoke with via Discord on the internet, and they
were all surprised that he had done such a
thing because with them he never spoke of politics.
So I mean it's all over the place at
this point in time. We're not sure if he
had really political motivations to do. What he did
or not and in its aftermath, even though we
were not sure of his motives, there, there were
people, right wingers in America, and Donald Trump himself,
who immediately, who immediately blamed the radical left, and
there were conspiracy theories on the internet about oh
it was a radical trans group that. I mean
that was behind the assassination and then there were,
I, I, I mean the things that it is
legitimate to call political persecution because for example on
Twitter, and I think this was really horrible, people
tried to dox people who were just criticizing Charlie
Kirk's views or for example celebrating and I also
have a question specifically about that celebrating his death
and uh there were a few people who lost
their jobs because of it and I, I mean
now there's this sort of discourse of going after
uh groups that are politicized and are and that
are on the radical left in America in the
aftermath of. The assassination. So I mean, what do
you think about all of that, because I mean
on the one hand, I would think myself that
if at this point we're not sure if the
killer had political motives, we can't really say that
it was a political assassination. That's the first thing,
even though Charlie Kirk was a political figure, he
was a political activist and so on. Uh, AND
on the other hand, I think that it's been
immoral, the sort of response that we've seen from
the Trump administration in response to something we're not
even sure was a political assassination. So what is
your opinion on that?
Well, what you have just said. Supports my earlier
claim that assassinations are normally and are usually predictably,
totally counterproductive. Uh, ANYBODY should have known this, that
is to say, if anybody did want to promote
some kind of left wing agenda. Assassinating Charlie Kirk
was about the most self-defeating way they could have
gone about promoting that agenda. It was totally predictable
that the Trump administration would react the way that
it has, that businesses and so on would defer
to Trump by punishing those people who, uh, uh,
afterwards were critical of Charlie Kirk. And so on.
So, um, and again, I would stress that, uh,
Charlie Kirk, I, I didn't even really know who
he was. I mean, I'm, I live in England
and I do get a lot of uh literature
about right-wing activity in the United States, but I
had never really heard of him because I'm not
that uh attentive. Um, HE certainly had not done
anything to make him liable to be killed. He
was simply going around giving talks defending certain views.
If you disagree with those views, you challenge the
views. You don't kill the person who is promoting
those views. I mean, again, it was intrinsically immoral
act and a totally self-defeating one if it was
politically motivated, and I suspect. That it had some
political motivation. It wasn't just arbitrary. He didn't just
pick somebody, you know, he didn't pick somebody he,
whose views he thought were, were, were, were really
admirable. That, that wouldn't make any sense. I mean,
unless the guy is just totally deranged. But again,
there's no reason to think that, particularly if he
Inscribed things on his bullets as these people tend
to do nowadays, which is just. Uh, uh. Yeah.
Again, uh, would never occur to anybody in the
Trump administration to think that this kind of thing
might, uh, suggest, uh, that it would be a
good idea to have, um, Uh, much more restriction
on people's access to guns in that lunatic society
where all the right wingers at least are armed
to the teeth. Um, YOU know, they're the ones
who are going on about political violence and, well,
everybody goes on about political violence, but, uh, Uh,
you'd have, you'd have thought that, that, that, uh,
some of them might say something about, um, trying
to deprive people like this assassin of, of guns,
but that would never occur to people there. Um,
BUT yeah, your, your general point is that Uh
We don't know whether this was a political assassination,
but it's automatically treated as one, and I would
say exploited as one by Trump and Vance and
the other members of the administration and other people
on the right in the United States. They exploiting
this to further polarize the society, to uh inflame
hatreds against uh people on the left and and
so on. And again, I think it's um It's
certainly unwise and I think also inappropriate for people
to rejoice in the murder of Charlie Kirk, and
this was an assassination. It was a murder. I
mean, if the person is not liable to be
killed, it's, it's, it's legally and morally murder. And
so this was clearly an instance of murder. To
uh. To celebrate a murder is wrong. To
But, but let me ask
criticize the views of the person is perfectly appropriate
and people are being punished for that.
But, but do you think that uh celebrating a
murder is wrong? I, I mean, is it just
simply, uh, breaking a social norm, or do you
consider it morally wrong?
If it's a murder, I consider it morally wrong.
Um, IF there were, I mean, now, look, if
Stalin had been assassinated and that had led to
some liberalization internal to the Soviet Union, then I
think celebrations would have been. Uh, ENTIRELY appropriate. And
that's because they're celebrating the elimination of someone who
was liable to be killed, whose elimination is going
to be better for innocent people. So it makes
a lot of difference whether it's a justified assassination
or a murder. If it's murder, the victim is
not liable and the consequences are going to be
bad, then it's, yeah, it is, it is wrong
to celebrate.
OK, it is, it is morally wrong, but do
you think that people who celebrate a murder, um,
should be deprived of work? I mean, that they
should be fired, that that is the proportionate punishment
for them.
No, I don't think that there should be any,
uh any legal restriction on celebrating. The death of
anybody. Um, AND I also think the private forms
of punishment are generally also inappropriate. I mean, It
it all depends on the context. Suppose there's a
small business. You know, there are 3 people who
run a, uh, let's say, you know, some sort
of little market. And one of them is found
to be celebrating publicly a murder. No, that's going
to be bad for the business. It's, it's wrong
to, to do that. Uh, IN those circumstances, it
might very well be, uh, right for the other
owners of the business to expel the one who
has behaved badly, um, for for various reasons, both
personal moral reasons and business reasons. But that's not
what's going on in the, in the cases, uh,
now. Uh, WHAT'S going on now is just that,
um, businesses are, are afraid of the Trump administration.
They're afraid of bad publicity and so on, and
they sacrifice, uh, people who in the most part,
for the most part, haven't so much celebrated, but
have just said, you know, he was a bad
person, Charlie Kirk, his views were iniquitous and, and
so on. Um. So again, it depends on whether,
whether you're just criticizing the person and criticizing the
person's views or saying how wonderful it is that
he was killed. Those are completely different activities. Mhm.
Right, and I mean, generally speaking, because now we're
getting also into the topic of free speech and
what should be protected speech. I mean, generally speaking,
do you think that there are any instances where
people should be fired because of them expressing particular
political opinions? I mean, I'm going to give you
an example. A few months ago, Media Sun, the
left-wing journalist and political commentator from the US, had
a debate on a YouTube channel called Jubilee Against
20 right-wing conservatives. I mean, some of them were
even farther right than just a common right-wing. Conservative
because one of them expressed openly that he was
a fascist and they didn't care about the American,
the US Constitution and the person who expressed openly
admitted openly that he was a fascist after the
debate ended up getting fired. Uh, I, I mean,
do you think that there should be limits to
the sort of political opinions people can express publicly
and then, uh, getting punished in that way of
getting fired because I mean, I, I, I fall
more on the left wing of the political spectrum
and I don't like fascists at all, but I
don't agree that that person should have been fired.
Yeah, I agree with you, um. I can, again,
I can imagine special circumstances. So suppose this is
someone who's part of a very small business and
I'm I'm a, I'm somebody who works for this
business, and I've always thought that this person was,
you know, a decent person. And then I learn
this person says he's a fascist or she, whatever,
he's a fascist and, you know, has all these
views that I think are really abhorrent. I might
not want to work with this person. I might
want some distance from this person, and if everybody
else in the business is, is the same, then
we might together decide we just don't want to
be around this guy anymore. I can imagine that.
Uh, BEING justifiable, and, but by and large, I
agree with you. Um, SOMEBODY holds abhorrent views, particularly
in a big business where this person is just
doing some job and Uh, his views are not
going to affect his effectiveness in the business or
his relations with others in the business. So it's
sort of pure publicity purposes to get rid of
this person because of his views, um, then I
think that's wrong.
Yeah, I mean, I, I think exactly the same.
I mean, I think that if a person's views
does not, does not er affect directly their performance,
the work they're doing, I mean, I don't think
it's justifiable. Let me give you another example, and
this is not a, a case of people having
a particular kind of political view, but I think
it, it was also uh Funny in a way.
So, uh, there's a far right party here in
Portugal called SHG, and just, uh, over a week
ago we had our municipal elections here and people
found out that one of the candidates they put,
they put forth, uh, in a particular. The municipality
was, was a woman who had an only fans
account, so she was a creator, an only fans
account. I mean it is basically
I don't know site.
OK, I'm going to explain it's a website where
women and men wherever can create adult content. So,
that, that, that's it. They can create pornography, and
things like that, and they can sell it there
or people can subscribe to their accounts to things
like that, and there, there were people who were
insinuating that because she had uh that account and
she had that kind of activity that we should
question. Uh, HER, uh, competence to be part or,
or, or to or to be part of a
municipality to be a politician, and, and I, and
I said, look, why she has that kind of
activity, but what kind of direct implications does that
have for her work as a politician as long
as she's competent, as long as she knows what
she's doing. Why should we think she's less intelligent
or less competent or less capable than, for example,
a woman who's not a sex worker, you know,
so I mean, those are my thoughts. This is
the way I think. I don't know if you
agree or not.
Well, I mean, I, I, I, I don't think
I entirely agree. I see your view. The one
thing I would say is that if One should
prefer to elect for to to responsible governmental positions,
people who have good judgment. And in particular, if
you're running for one of, if you're, if you
become a candidate for one of these things, and
you maintain your own sort of pornography website or
whatever it is, that's clearly not good judgment. And
so that's evidence that this person, um, lacks a
certain kind of competence. Uh, SO I do, I
do think it's relevant. If I found this out
about a person, I mean, if the person otherwise
had really good, strong, decent views about everything, I,
you know, I agreed enthusiastically with everything she said
about local government, about international affairs, about politics, about
morality, and so on. But there was this one.
Um, uh, INSTANCE of what I would consider a
poor judgment and questionable behavior, I would still go
ahead and vote for her. Um, BUT I do
think it's a sort of mark against a candidate
that the candidate would, um, behave in this way
and in particular, While Being a candidate for political
office.
OK, so, uh, just to understand your position a
little bit better, uh, in that particular case, do
you think it's poor judgment to be a sex
worker? Why specifically? Because you think that's a sort
of, um, immoral activity or is it for another
reason?
Uh, I honestly don't know what I think about
sex workers. I, as I understood what you were
saying initially, I didn't understand this, that this woman
was a sex worker. I thought she and a
man had some kind of Website where they sold
or distributed videos of them having sex or something.
Uh uh
uh NO, I mean, it's an individual thing, it's
individual women who can create accounts on that website
and then sell their, their, I mean, explicit content,
whatever it might be, so,
OK, well, that's not, well, is that. I don't,
I, I don't, I don't really know what the
definition of a sex worker is, so she could
have all this explicit content without actually having sex
with anybody. So she wouldn't, she wouldn't physically, well,
even so, I do think that's, uh, it, it,
it, it, it's, uh. Yeah, I think it's a
um. An unseemly way to earn money. It's You
know, uh, To, to sell erotic videos of yourself,
um, I mean, I, I, this is something I
just don't have a view about, um. And sex
workers in general, uh. I just don't know. It's
not, it's not something I've thought about. I, uh,
um.
OK, that that's fair enough, that's fair enough. So
let me just ask you then one last question
and since we were just talking about uh free
speech, do you think that if there are instances
where political violence might be justified, do you think
that calling for political violence should be protected speech?
Um, I assume that by protected speech, you mean
that there, that there should be no legal constraints
on this, and, uh, I'm inclined to think that
there should be some legal constraints on Um, Speech
advocating political violence. And That's not because I think
advocacy of political violence is always wrong. It is
that In order to try to constrain advocacy for
morally unjustified political violence, and as I have said
before, I think most political violence is morally unjustified.
It, it, it either targets people who are not
liable to be harmed or it's going to be
self-defeating if it does target people who are genuine
wrongdoers. So political violence is very unlikely to be
justified. So, Um, It's wise and likely to have
the best consequences for society for there to be
legal constraints on the advocacy of political violence, um,
though. There are instances in which the advocacy of
political violence could be morally justified and possibly even
morally required. Sometimes we are morally required to break
the law and to break a justified law.
Yeah. OK, so, uh, let's perhaps wrap up our
conversation here. I think we've already went through the
most relevant aspects that I wanted to explore here.
So, uh, Jeff, apart from your books, which we've
already explored, I mean, at least some of them
on the show, are there any places on the
internet where people can find your work?
Um, HMM, yeah, the people could find papers that
I've published on my, uh, University of Oxford web
page, though it hasn't been updated in about 4
or 5 years, so a lot of my recent
publications aren't there. Um, THERE'S also a website called
academia.edu. And you just type that in academia.edu and
then you put in my name and a lot
of my uh articles and so on are posted
there. Mhm.
Great. So, thank you so much for taking the
time to come on the show again. It's always
a great pleasure to talk with you.
Well, thanks, Ricardo. Again, as I've said before, your,
your show is just magnificent. Uh, YOU, you. You
must be the most learned, uh, person in the
world because you have to, you have to read
books by all the people you interview and so
on. I mean, you must know infinitely more than
I do. It's a remarkable show.
Thank you. Hi guys, thank you for watching this
interview until the end. If you liked it, please
share it, leave a like and hit the subscription
button. The show is brought to you by Enlights,
Learning and Development done differently. Check their website at
lights.com and also please consider supporting the show on
Patreon or PayPal. I would also like to give
a huge thank you to my main patrons and
PayPal supporters, Perergo Larsson, Jerry Mulleran, Frederick Sundo, Bernard
Seyaz Olaf, Alex, Adam Cassel, Matthew Whittingberrd, Arnaud Wolf,
Tim Hollis, Eric Elena, John Connors, Philip Forrest Connolly.
Then Dmitri Robert Windegerru Inai Zu Mark Nevs, Colin
Holbrookfield, Governor, Michel Stormir, Samuel Andre, Francis Forti Agnun,
Svergoo, and Hal Herzognon, Michel Jonathan Labrarith, John Yardston,
and Samuel Cerri, Hines, Mark Smith, John Ware, Tom
Hammel, Sardusran, David Sloan Wilson, Yasilla Dezara Romain Roach,
Diego Londono Correa. Yannik Punter DaRosmani, Charlotte Blis Nicole
Barbaro, Adam Hunt, Pavlostazevski, Alec Baka Madison, Gary G.
Alman, Semov, Zal Adrian Yei Poltontin, John Barboza, Julian
Price, Edward Hall, Edin Bronner, Douglas Fry, Franco Bartolotti,
Gabriel P Scortez or Suliliski, Scott Zachary Fish, Tim
Duffyanny Smith, and Wisman. Daniel Friedman, William Buckner, Paul
Georg Jarno, Luke Lovai, Georgios Theophannus, Chris Williamson, Peter
Wolozin, David Williams, Dio Costa, Anton Ericsson, Charles Murray,
Alex Shaw, Marie Martinez, Coralli Chevalier, Bangalore atheists, Larry
D. Lee Junior. Old Eringbon. Esterri, Michael Bailey, then
Spurber, Robert Grassy, Zigoren, Jeff McMahon, Jake Zul, Barnabas
Raddix, Mark Kempel, Thomas Dovner, Luke Neeson, Chris Story,
Kimberly Johnson, Benjamin Galbert, Jessica Nowicki, Linda Brendan, Nicholas
Carlson, Ismael Bensleyman. George Ekoriati, Valentine Steinmann, Per Crawley,
Kate Van Goler, Alexander Obert, Liam Dunaway, BR, Massoud
Ali Mohammadi, Perpendicular, Jannes Hetner, Ursula Guinov, Gregory Hastings,
David Pinsov, Sean Nelson, Mike Levin, and Jos Necht.
A special thanks to my producers Iar Webb, Jim
Frank Lucas Stink, Tom Vanneden, Bernardine Curtis Dixon, Benedict
Mueller, Thomas Trumbull, Catherine and Patrick Tobin, John Carlomon
Negro, Al Nick Cortiz, and Nick Golden, and to
my executive producers, Matthew Lavender, Sergio Quadrian, Bogdan Kanis,
and Rosie. Thank you for all.